[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How do we create a reality?
What are the tools that
your words, your vocabulary,
the way you see things, the
way you construct something?
Every single word
contains a universe.
But I recognize that
some people's vocabulary
lacked words powerful
enough to help them heal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've talked a lot
about power in this series.
And there's a reason for that
because everything in life
is on a power
calculus, whether it's
physical power or emotional
power, sexual power
or spiritual power
or creative power.
And it doesn't matter.
We want to know,
will this empower me?
Or will this situation
disempower me?
Will this conversation
empower me?
Everything you do, whether
you're conscious about it
or not, is calculated
by a power factor.
Inevitably, the
answer comes down
to the words that
were spoken to you.
It's the power of your words.
You listen to what
someone will say to you,
how you're going to
phrase something,
what the tone of
the words they use--
everything is done
according to words.
As a wordsmith and a writer of
dozens of articles and books,
I've always paid
attention to words.
I love words.
Honestly, I used to sleep--
in fact, I still do--
with a dictionary
on my nightstand.
And I would read words.
And sometimes I'd think
to myself, this new word--
and I can't wait to
use this new word--
it's a word I
never heard before,
and how that word
would change my world.
And this love of
words was probably
one of the greatest
assets in healing
because I listened
to what and how
people phrase their universe,
how they explain themselves
with the words they use.
And I realized into my work
that a healing vocabulary
is actually a
requirement for healing.
That is, how we think, how
you construct a thought, what
we tell ourselves,
what we believe,
the thoughts we dwell
in can be dealbreakers.
And what seems
extraordinary to me
is the fact that many people
lack a healing vocabulary.
While they may, for example,
speak about the need
to forgive, they
use the language
of anger or of retaliating to
hurt the people they resent.
And in the process,
they hurt themselves.
They continually
choose words that
aren't problem solving words.
People will use phrases such
as, I don't deserve this,
or, I've always
been a good person.
How did this happen to me?
Or, this is not my
fault. I blame my divorce
for this illness.
So intensely negative
are the words
they use that they serve only
to reinforce their illness.
And all the while, they
think they're healing.
But healing requires
a positive vocabulary
that helps you to
reframe even the most
frightening circumstances that
you might find yourself in.
Consider this.
We give our word or
we break our word.
And either way
shatters or creates
an entirely different universe.
So let's talk about the
power of your words.
And I'm not sure how
many people actually
ever pause to think about,
what's the power of the word
that I'm using?
I'm going to share a story
because I love this story.
These are the stories
that have shaped my world.
And one day I was at a
dinner party in England
with very dear friends of mine.
And they had a guest
named Sister Jolenta.
She changed my life.
And she was talking
about an email
that she got from a bishop.
How have times changed
about nuns getting emails
from bishops?
And that alone was fun.
She said she got this email,
and she had to respond.
And he was getting
impatient with her
because she wasn't
responding fast enough.
And so she sent him an email.
And as she was telling
this story to us,
she said, well, you know,
I thought to myself,
he had all this time
to reflect on the words
that he put down to me.
And I was thinking
to myself, he's
not giving me enough
time to reflect
on the words I wanted
to send to him.
And then she said
to us, and you know,
I had to take into consideration
how the words I would use
would impact all the people
I was responsible for.
She was going to reflect on how
every word she had to choose
was going to impact
the lives of everyone
she was responsible for.
So every word was
a universe for her.
That conversation that
night was one of the richest
ones I'd ever had in my life.
So rich that I took the word
reflection, a word that I knew
I had not used much in my
world, and I decided right then
it would become a
pivotal word in my life.
And I named my online class
Reflections in her honor
because I realized I did not
spend time in reflection.
If you take that one
word out of your life,
that you do not reflect on
the quality of the words
that you use, the quality of
the actions in your life--
if that one word is
missing, consider
the shape of your inner life
because that one word is not
there.
How powerful that one word is.
How powerful every word is.
Think of the book of Genesis.
In the beginning was the word.
So what does it mean to
give your word to someone?
How much of the scar
tissue you carry,
or how much of the
resentment you carry
is because of a word
someone used that you
feel you can't get over?
Now, in my history was
healing, in my history
with people in
workshops, for example,
or in dealing with illness or in
dealing with emotional trauma,
the source of the
trauma often comes down
to what was said to someone.
I was told when I was
younger that I would never
amount to anything or that
I was a horrible person.
A handful of words had the
power to traumatize someone
for the rest of their life.
Or conversely, the words that
were never said to somebody--
I was never told that
I was loved enough--
words that were
missing in your life.
How is it that we even know each
other except through the words
that we exchange with each
other and what it means
to give our word to each other?
There was a time
in our society when
giving your word to someone
was enough to seal a contract.
But I gave them my word.
A word was enough to seal
a bond, a partnership,
for the rest of your life.
Now, today we need
lawyers, we need contracts,
we need signatures,
we need all of this
because we don't
think of our word
as having that kind of clout.
But we should.
And you know why we should?
This is the irony.
This is the paradox of it.
Just when we are beginning to
realize that thoughts create
form, that thoughts
create our health,
that thoughts create
our world, this
is when, in fact, we should
absolutely look at the power
that every word has that
we say to each other.
What words wander on their own
through your mind and heart?
What words just carry
on in their own way
and then talk to
you on their own
all day long and set up
your reality for you?
What words have
authority over you
that actually shouldn't have
any authority over you at all?
Things like this.
I'm just no good at this.
I will fail at this.
I can't try.
These are words
that talk to you.
They have no validity,
none whatsoever.
But they stop you from
becoming everything
you could possibly be.
Here's another thing.
This is something I figured
out, and it's the truth.
The more powerless a
person is, the more they're
going to shrink their world down
to the smallest word, the word
no.
Watch how this works.
When a person's world becomes
powerless on the outside,
that person will refer
to the only power
they have on the inside,
which is the power to say no.
And you'll say, do
you want to do this?
No.
Do you want to try this?
Would you want to go here?
No.
So they'll cling to
the one word they
know has power, the power to
control options, the power
to stop their world.
That's how powerful
the word no is.
Instead of the word
that has the authority
to keep their world
moving, which is
yes-- do you want to go here?
Yes.
Let's try that.
Do you want to try this?
Yes.
That sounds great.
Well, how about if
we do the-- yes.
That sounds wonderful.
Well, does this sound
like a good idea?
Absolutely yes.
Let's give that a try.
That's how powerful
the word yes is.
But when you feel
powerless, you're
going to go to the tiniest
word that stops everything
from flowing in your life.
This is how powerful
the tiniest words are.
What words do you have
to constantly remind
yourself of the words that
other people have said to you?
Now, that's a great
big huge question
because you can
either remind yourself
of positive words people
have said that inspire you
or words that deplete you.
When I was in high school,
I had a bit of an attitude.
And I know that's hard
to imagine, but I did.
And I thought that
when you're inspired,
you don't have to be
educated, that inspiration
was its own education.
And I soon learned that
that wasn't the case.
And this one wonderful nun
said to me, come here, Missy.
She said, here's your paper.
And I got a very bad grade.
And we don't have
to go into that.
But what she did say
was, listen here.
If you want to be
a writer, you have
to learn the laws of English
so that you can break them
like a master.
None of this stuff again.
Those words were
the greatest wisdom.
And I reminded myself
of them again and again
and again and again.
Other people remind
themselves of words people
said to them that hurt them.
As I was in healing, and I
listened to people remind me
of their wounds, I would
think, why do you keep
reminding yourself of that?
Why do you keep playing that
over and over and over again?
And I've said to
people so many times,
if you could see
those people again,
and you would have the
opportunity to say to them,
you said this to me.
You said to me I would
never be worthwhile.
Would that satisfy you
to take those words
and give them back to them?
What do you think would happen?
Well, I would feel satisfied.
Would you?
What if what really would
happen is they would say to you,
I don't remember
saying that to you.
I don't remember those words.
You remember them.
But I don't.
And that's the truth.
So let's talk about something.
Let's move to this.
What's the most liberating
word that you could actually
get the meaning of?
And that's the word humble.
So I'm going to just pause here.
And we're going to go inside
the word humble and all that's
connected to the word, which
is humiliating and humbleness--
the whole family of that word
because here's what's true.
The word humiliating is
a word that I already
know is in your head.
I already know that.
And this is how it talks.
It says, you can't do
that because you're
going to be humiliated.
Or it speaks like this.
It says, what will they say?
And that that word has clout.
Or it speaks to you like this.
It creates fantasies for you.
And one of the fantasies
that it creates
is that you imagine that
your purpose in life
is to be something
great big huge
and glamorous and wonderful.
Your purpose in life, mind
you, is to be all of this
so that you could
go over to someone
who humiliated you
way back when and say,
see how important I am?
That's what that one
word-- that one word
carries that big
a universe in it.
When I was writing about
this in Entering the Castle,
I looked up the word
humiliation, humble.
And you know what?
The Oxford English Dictionary
lists humble as being poor,
to be poor.
And that is not true at all.
If I could give you
one word to empower you
for the rest of your
life, I would say,
here's the word, humble.
Be humble.
Nothing is as powerful
as understanding
the meaning of humble.
If you could pour
that word into you,
drench yourself in
the meaning of what
it is to walk this
world with humbleness,
to humble up as my motto--
picture yourself this
way, that all the words
that people say to
you that you fear,
that you'll never
be good enough,
or they're better than you,
no longer have clout over you,
because that feeling
of pride or hubris
would evaporate
because you would begin
to feel a power in
yourself that says,
I don't need their approval.
Why?
What's wrong with me?
Why would I need their approval?
That world is not
better than me.
Humbleness is not about poverty.
It's about freedom.
With a motto like humble
up, let's talk about words
you should ban and
never, ever use again.
The word deserve-- if I was
your spiritual director,
and you were sitting
across from me,
I would say, now, exactly
what do you think you deserve?
And where do you get
off with the idea
that you deserve anything?
Is it because of where you were
born or because of your height?
Where does that come from?
And what you'd say to me
is because you've suffered.
You've worked so hard.
You've this or that.
You'd come up with some
excuse, all of which
I would counteract.
Deserve indulges your
worst entitlements.
That one word gives you
permission to pick up a drink,
to overspend, or to
overeat, for example.
Deserve is a word that
gets you in trouble.
Take it out of your vocabulary.
Just do it for a week
and watch what happens.
Blame.
Blame is another word.
Blame is a punitive
word where you
want to discount your
own responsibility.
You can't use the word blame.
And here's another word.
Now, this one's not going to go
over big, but it's the truth.
Entitled.
You aren't entitled to anything.
That word is a rough one.
And I don't mean it
politically, by the way.
I mean nobody is born entitled.
None of us.
Now, my favorite Saint,
Teresa of Ãvila, who I adore,
she used to say to her nuns,
you're not entitled to anything
at all.
And I don't want to
see it in your face.
And then she would
follow it with this.
Everything wonderful
that happens
to you, all the good
things in your life,
you did not make
it happen to you.
You're not entitled to them.
They are given to you.
And that's called blessing.
Think about someone who
absolutely loves you.
And in fact, one day, when
they're not looking at you,
go look at them and imagine that
this is what they're thinking.
They're thinking that their
life is so much better
because you're in it,
because you're in it
and that if something
happened to you,
they would mourn deeply.
And their whole world would
change because you're not in.
Now, you're not entitled
to that kind of love.
But nonetheless,
it happened to you.
Somehow you found somebody who
loves you that much and thinks,
my world would be so empty.
And that person could be
your partner, your lover,
your husband, your wife, even
your children, your friends.
You can't make that
kind of love happen.
You do not have that kind of--
and here's the operative word--
power.
You just don't have it.
But it happened.
So take the word entitled out,
and put the word blessing in.
And look at all of these
wondrous things that
happened to you and think,
I am seriously blessed.
That's a word you can use.
And don't crave false praise or
endless attention, for example.
You will end up
compromising yourself.
You will negotiate
some part of your soul
to get something that
is not worth anything,
perhaps a glance
from a stranger,
only to realize you've
given up something
so precious of yourself for
the illusion of a second's
worth of meaningless attention.
Here's another word
you're going to take out--
judge.
Don't judge things,
including yourself--
including yourself.
How do you know
what's good or bad?
How do you know when something
happens to you if it's
a disaster or an opportunity?
I won't bother sharing those
many, many stories that say,
this is a disaster.
This is good or this is bad.
There's so many.
But you know if you
judge everything
by whether it's
pain or pleasure,
you're going to end up
down the wrong street.
Here's the word that
you're going to use--
wisdom.
I need some serious wisdom here.
And wisdom tells me to
back off and to not get
attached to what's happening
here and to say, how is it
that I should respond
in this moment?
And watch my words.
Watch how frame this.
Do I tell myself
this is a disaster?
Or do I say, be centered.
Be still and trust
what's happening
and work my way through
it with courage.
Here's a word you need--
courage.
Be centered.
Make sure you reflect on what
is happening in that moment.
Here's the truth.
We're terrified to
become conscious.
We really are.
We're terrified because the
more conscious we become,
we have to become very
mindful of the words we use.
We have to become
incredibly mindful.
And one of the things we become
mindful of is we become more
conscious, is that we have to
redefine our responsibilities
to the whole of humanity.
We have to really get we're
not isolated creatures.
We have responsibilities
to the whole.
What is in one is in the whole.
I belong to everybody, and
everybody belongs to me,
that, in fact, what I
say matters to everybody.
And you know what?
We actually don't want
these things to be true.
Holism is great on paper.
But it takes a great
deal to live holism.
It takes a great deal.
So what words empower us?
What words?
These are the big leaguers.
I talked about humble.
But here are some others.
Mercy.
Mercy is a powerhouse.
Compassion.
Detachment.
Stay detached, like I said.
Hold yourself detached before
you respond to something.
And then consciously
reflect and say,
what words am I going to use
to frame the experience that I
am in?
I'm going to give you
a workshop exercise.
Now, I told people in
a workshop one time--
I said, I want you to tell
me all about yourself.
And I want you to
language this in words
you've never used before.
But you can't use
negative words.
You have to tell
me about yourself,
but you can't bring
your baggage with you.
You can't tell me anything
about your history.
And you know what?
A lot of them couldn't do it.
A lot of them couldn't--
because they were so used
to the negative language
of saying, well,
their wounds or their
history was so filled with
the negative.
For example, I asked
one woman who I knew
had been sharing her wounds
with everyone to tell me
about herself, only I
asked her to leave out
her painful history.
I asked her to highlight
all the positive things that
had happened in her life, as
no one's life is all sorrow
or suffering.
And she stared at me, as if
I'd asked her to jump off
the Golden Gate Bridge.
And she began to cough
and cough and cough.
And finally, she excused
herself from our conversation.
And I said, tell me something
positive about your past.
Talk to me about all the
good things that happened.
And for them, it was
difficult. It was
difficult. The
exercise is, think
about the wisdom that was
said to you in your life,
the good words that were said.
And here's another exercise.
Do you empower other
people with your language
or disempower them?
Pay attention to the
language you use.
And note if it's difficult for
you to empower another person.
And ask yourself, why?
Reflect on that, that
I can't use a power
word with another person.
And then you have
to ask yourself,
what exactly is that about,
that I find empowering
other people difficult?
Now, even the subtlest
choice changes a position.
Decide, for example, that
you're going to pay attention
to the tone of voice that
you use when you use words,
that that's a big deal.
As you begin to
listen to words, you
decide that I even have
to watch the volume.
The subtlest choices
make a big difference.
So just consider the
power of these two words
when I ask this question.
Are you ready to really be free?
Yes or no.
Thanks.
[MUSIC PLAYING]